
[Illustration: A head and shoulders rose out of the moonlit gully]


                           WRITTEN IN SAND

            Little by little a mystery unfolded itself to
            Bob Zane out on the desert, but for a solution
            he had to ask the murmuring sands themselves

                       By Erle Stanley Gardner

                          A Whispering Tale


There are nights when a camp fire seems to profane the desert, and this
was one of them. The moon hung low and round in the heavens, and the
Colorado Basin was bathed in warm, mellow light like the amber of old
wine.

But I wanted fried potatoes for breakfast, and I’d put off cooking them
until the night got cooler. Boil potatoes for half an hour, then let
them stand overnight, cut them into slices and fry them with onions,
add a little bacon and wash down with coffee. That’s a breakfast
that’ll stay by you. That’s why my camp fire was crackling away under
the desert moon, and the water was bubbling and steaming over the
potatoes.

Off to the west, a mile or so, was Signal Butte. To the east, the
lights of Calexico and Mexicali twinkled like brazen jewels. To the
north, the Superstition Mountains basked in the light of the mellow
moon.

The flames of the camp fire died down to a bed of glowing coals. A
light breeze came up from out of the night, and the desert commenced to
whisper.

Desert whispers are funny things, and they vary just as the desert
varies. Up around Death Valley the desert whispers will be hard and
hissing, filled with an ominous menace. Down here by the border,
they’ll be languid, romantic, dreamy.

But the Colorado Basin’s a funny desert, anyway. Down by the
Superstition Mountains, where the whole valley is under sea level, and
the soil is composed mostly of silt that’s been washed down by the big
river, the whole desert’s entirely different from what it is a hundred
miles north. Deserts are like that. At times you’ll have high stretches
covered with giant cacti and greasewood. Then you’ll have barren places
where even a stray sage can’t get nourishment. But always you will hear
whispers. They’re the heritage of the desert.

Of course, those whispers aren’t really voices. I know as well as you
do that they’re the noises made by the sand scurrying along on the
wings of the desert winds and rustling against the cacti and the sage.
And then, when the wind gets stronger, you can hear the sound of sand
rustling against sand, the strangest whisper of all.

But here’s something to think about: Those sand whispers somehow or
other color the whole desert country. Meet a man who’s lived a long
time in the desert, and there’ll be a husky hiss in his voice, a dry
whispering note that brands every word he utters. And the desert teems
with other whispers, whispers of lost mines, of fabulous fortunes
buried by the Spaniards when the Indians turned hostile.

                 *       *       *       *       *

I was thinking about those whispers when the desert began to whisper to
me. The ashes glowed in the breath of the wind. The sand scurried by
and made little whispering noises, tantalizing sounds that were almost
words. I strained my ears to listen--and while I was listening I heard
the other sounds that weren’t whispers.

There was the sound of feet in the dry wash, feet that weren’t
accustomed to walking on sand. They shuffled, stumbled, stamped a
couple of times as the man lurched forward, then shuffled again. They
came nearer. A head and shoulders showed in the moonlight as a man came
up out of the wash.

“Howdy,” he said, while he was still thirty yards off, and his voice
was anxious.

“Howdy,” I said.

He came toward me then, and the moonlight sent a short black shadow
splotching the white floor of the desert until it looked like a moving
blot of ink.

“You’re Bob Zane?” he asked.

“Yes,” I told him, and waited.

He sat down by the camp fire and held out his hands to the coals as
though it had been cold. But it was a warm night.

“They told me I’d find you out near Signal Butte. I had a hard time
trying to locate you. Then I saw your fire.”

I waited until he looked up from the coals. Then I said, “Yes.”

He looked back into the fire right away.

“My name’s Lucas,” he said, “Pete Lucas. They tell me you know the
desert from A to Z.”

“Nobody really knows the desert, Lucas,” I said.

He shuffled his weight around as though the sand was uncomfortable. He
rubbed his hands, and then held them toward the coals some more. What
he wanted to say didn’t come easy. I didn’t give him any encouragement.
Talk that’s hard to say out on the desert ain’t the sort of talk that’s
easy to listen to.

The red embers caught the front of his face. The moon silvered the
silhouette. All in all, I got a good look at him. He was about forty
years old, and he had something to conceal.

His head moved in swift jerks on a nervous neck. His mouth was weak and
the chin was pointed. The nose spread out into wide nostrils. The eyes
were weak and watery. The big sombrero that he’d tilted back was
obviously new.

“You could help me,” he said.

I didn’t say anything. Any man that had any proposition to make to me
could make it unaided.

“I need somebody that knows the desert.”

I kept silent.

He looked up at me, his watery eyes blinking in the red light of the
glowing embers.

“If a gent had been out in the desert to some sort of a secret place,
could you track him to that place? If you got started within, say,
twelve hours?”

I shook my head.

“I might, and again I mightn’t. Winds come up awful fast in the desert
countries.”

He sighed and let his eyes blink out over the desert.

“But suppose you got started a little sooner?”

“Well, how much sooner?”

“Three or four hours.”

“That sounds more like it.”

“What sort of a proposition could I make you--in money?”

“I don’t know. What could you?”

“I could offer you a thousand dollars for the job. But you’d want to be
awfully certain you could do it. If you fell down it would lose me a
lot of money.”

I ventured an innocent comment:

“We could track him some other time.”

“No,” he said, shaking his head, “he wouldn’t make any more tracks.”

I said nothing for a while, but listened to the sand whispers of the
desert. The moon looked like a great pumpkin just over my head. The
mountains were purple shadows against the golden glow of the night sky,
and the sagebrush cast black shadows.

                 *       *       *       *       *

My visitor was looking at me now, staring straight and steady, but that
was because I was looking out into the desert. As soon as I turned my
eyes back to his face, he started looking at the coals again. The sand
whispered little snatches of sound that were almost words but weren’t.

“Maybe we’d be crowding too close on this fellow, and he’d get wise,” I
suggested.

“No. When we start there won’t be nothing to be afraid of along that
line. It’ll be just a question of finding out where he went. There’ll
be two sets of tracks, one going out, one coming back.”

I added to his words, sort of casual-like:

“And the man that made ’em will be dead?”

He jumped back from the fire and got to his feet.

“I didn’t say that!”

“No; so you didn’t! It must have been that the desert whispered it to
me.”

He stood, teetering back and forth on his feet.

“Pshaw!” he said after a bit, and turned and strode away into the
desert just like he’d come, his feet shuffling, the black shadow
bobbing along over the silvery sand.

                 *       *       *       *       *

I drained the water off of the potatoes and spread my blankets.

I thought there was something else that moved out there in the desert.
Coyote, maybe, but I wasn’t sure. Twice I got a glimpse of motion, and
then there wasn’t anything except the moonlight, the warm night, the
sighing wind and the sand whispers.

I got under a light blanket, saw that my burro was all jake, and
pillowed my head on the saddle.

I started drifting off to sleep the way a man does in the open desert.
And the sand whispered a lullaby. My muscles relaxed, and isolated
thoughts flitted through my brain. The sand whispers became words and
strung out into a whole sentence.

There was something startling in that sentence, something I should
know. It snapped me wide awake, it was so important. I felt the sense
of the whisper slipping as I woke up, and I tried to hang on to what it
was. But it was no use. I snapped wide awake to the moon that was
shining down in my face, and the whispers were nothing but sand
rustling against sand.

I didn’t go back to sleep again right away. There was something I was
trying to get, like reaching for a lost dream. Sometimes I almost knew
what it was, but never well enough to get it fixed, just a hazy
impression.

The wind went down as suddenly as it had come up. The moon shone steady
and brilliant, and I went to sleep.

Daylight found me slicing the potatoes with onions. The bacon sizzled
in the frying pan, and then I dumped in the onions and potatoes. When
they were browned to a turn I washed them down with coffee.

But all the time, I was thinking of the man with the broad nose and the
watery eyes, whose hands had seemed cold so he had to toast ’em over
the embers of the desert fire. I remembered the flicker of motion I’d
seen out in the moonlight. Somehow or other, the desert whispers seemed
concerned with that flicker of motion.

The sun came up over the Chocolate Mountains, and the long shadows
settled over the desert. Right away it commenced to get hot.

I got my camp stuff staked out in the shade of a mesquite clump and
saddled my burro. Then I went out to where I’d seen that flicker of
motion. The tracks in the desert told the story.

The man with the watery eyes, who had given the name of Pete Lucas, had
come floundering over the desert with shuffling feet. Some distance
behind him had been a dainty-footed girl, walking as lightly as a young
doe. While Lucas had been talking with me, the girl had been lying down
on the slope of a sand dune where she could watch him. I didn’t think
it was close enough to enable her to hear what had been said.

When Lucas left, she left, too, following him.

I back-tracked the girl for a ways, trying to get a good imprint of her
foot. It was dainty and small, but she handled her feet as though she
knew what she was doing with ’em.

I got a track in a patch of silt soil that was a good one. It showed
that the left heel had a little chip gouged out of it, probably by a
rock. For the rest there wasn’t anything except tracks of a woman’s
shoes.

I rode the burro into Mexicali. I like it south of the border, like to
watch the types that come and go; besides, it’s all a desert country
and the desert has got into my blood. When you first see the desert and
get out in it, you’ll either like it or you’ll hate it. Most of the
time, if you hate it, it’ll be because you’re afraid of it. Then, after
a while, when the desert gets into your blood, you’ll find it motherly.

But it’s a jealous mother, and it only takes care of its own. Those
that know the desert and respect its power get along in it. Those that
get flippant are likely to be found some place with circling buzzards,
swollen tongue, and fingers that have had the flesh ribboned from the
bone through delirious digging for water.

The desert’s got me. I have to be out in it. It’s in my blood. I don’t
stay long around the border ports. It’s an interesting sight to
see--once in a while. After that you want to forget it.

But I did want to see if I could find a girl with the heel of her left
shoe chipped.

I found the guy with the watery eyes, and I kept him from seeing me.
The gambling tables were just opening up, and the big horseshoe bar in
the old Owl, that’s now the A. B. W. Club, was swinging into action.

This chap, Lucas, was looking for somebody. After an hour or so he
found him; I could tell by the expression in his eyes. The vague,
watery look vanished, and the eyes snapped to hazel hardness. The flat
nose expanded until the nostrils were two black, round holes, and Lucas
wet his lips with his tongue.

I followed his eyes to the man he’d spotted. He was a big man, with a
great dome of a forehead and eyes that were puckered in thought. He
wasn’t accustomed to the desert places, and the sun hadn’t been kind to
his skin. The eyes were red-rimmed from drink and sun, and he seemed a
little bit shaky. He took a couple of cocktails, and then went to the
gaming tables. He gambled until noon, and then he had some lunch. He
played roulette and he was about a thousand dollars ahead. After lunch,
he ran into a streak of bad luck. His pile melted, and as it melted he
began to plunge, which is the wrong way to gamble. Any old gambler will
tell you to crowd your luck when it’s coming your way, but to hold ’em
close to your chest when you’re cold.

And Lucas kept watching the big chap with the dome forehead, keeping in
the background, watching, watching, watching.

About three o’clock in the afternoon, when the big chap was down to his
last stack, luck turned. He rode it hard. He bet the limit straight up
and won time and again. The chips were scattered all out in a big pile.
They changed croupiers half a dozen times. He just kept on winning and
winning and winning.

                 *       *       *       *       *

Then when he must have had five thousand dollars in front of him, the
chap with the watery eyes walked up and tapped him on the forehead.

The big man had just won a bet. His face was flushed with liquor and
success. He turned impatient eyes as he scooped in the chips, and then
froze into startled inactivity. His jaw sagged until I could see his
pink gullet. The eyes bulged until the red rim seemed an inch wide.

“Pete Lucas!” he said, and his voice held nothing of welcome.

Lucas laughed, and the laugh was harsh.

“You’re not having to go out in the desert to-night, eh, Sam Slade?”

“Out in the desert--how--what do you mean?”

“You know what I mean.”

Slade scooped his chips toward the croupier.

“Quitting,” he said.

“Afraid you might lose some of ’em back?” the croupier sneered.

Slade’s eyes snapped cold and hard.

“You heard me,” he said.

I didn’t like the expression of his eyes. I’ve seen killers before,
from outlaw horses to rattlesnakes. He had the look of a killer. The
croupier saw it too, and he didn’t say anything. He rang a bell, and
the money came in.

Then, when he had the money all laid out, Slade did a funny thing. He
divided it into two equal piles, and Pete Lucas took one of the piles.
Somehow or other, though, it was just what I’d been expecting.

Then they walked into a restaurant, the San Diego Bar and Café.

That suited me. I wanted eats, and they make ’em good at the San Diego.
Chinese cooks and waiters, anything you want: venison, quail, doves,
lobster, oysters. I sat down where I could see them when they went out.
No use to try and see ’em while they ate. The booths had curtains up
the side, and were built for privacy.

I had some broiled baby lobster, some quail on toast and a bottle of
Tipo wine that dated back ten years--you can get it if you know the
ropes.

Low voices came from the booth where the two men ate. Once I heard a
sharp exclamation, and a chair scraped back. Then a voice talked low
and fast, and I heard the chair being pulled back to the table. After
that there was more talking.

Then the Chinese waiter disappeared, and a pair of jet black eyes bored
into mine over the top of a serving tray.

                 *       *       *       *       *

“Want some dessert?”

It was a girl. I’d place her at around twenty-three or four. She knew
her way about, and she’d lived. There was a snap to the jaw that was
all business. Her eyes were like a couple of ripe olives. The
complexion was clear and dark. The hair was a piled mass of midnight
clouds that framed her face.

“Well?” she wanted to know.

I shook my head. “Nothing more.”

She dropped the curtain and went toward the other booth. I looked at
her as she bent over, picking dishes off the table. As she reached for
a dish across the table, there was the flash of a silk-stockinged leg
as she kicked it out behind her to keep her balance, and I caught a
glimpse of the heel.

It had a chip gouged out.

There it was, a little drama of life taking place right before my eyes,
and yet I couldn’t get it pieced together.

I paid my check and sipped my wine until the glass was empty. Then I
went out into the streets of the desert town. There was the usual crowd
of tourists, and there was something else--low-hung black clouds that
scraped the tops of the mountains and sent black streamers trailing
toward the ground.

Rain in the desert. It happens, but mighty infrequently.

The rain started within fifteen minutes, and the silt soil turned to a
slick mud on top of a hard foundation that was like grease smeared on
cement. People tried to walk across the street and their feet flew out
from under. Automobiles skidded and slid into a devil’s dance that
swept ’em against curbs with crushed wheels, or crashed ’em into each
other.

The rain came down in swift torrents for half an hour, and then there
was a rift in the clouds, a patch of blue sky, and the sun was shining.

People who knew the desert stood on the sidewalks to see the cloud
effects. The tourists lapped up the booze and plunged into the gambling
games. The desert showed clear and sparkling, the clouds melted as by
magic, and the sun’s rays beat down.

Then, right in the middle of my speculation as to what I was going to
do next, there was the scream of a woman. It was a knife-like scream,
thin and drawn with terror; and then the sound of a shot crashed out.

A Chinaman shrilled a staccato sentence in Cantonese, and scuttled out
of the San Diego bar like a frightened quail scurrying for cover.
Another Chinese followed on his heels. A tipsy American bellowed for
the police. A bartender in a white apron came out and looked up and
down the street. A khaki-clad little brown man with a heavy revolver
swinging from his hip sprinted for the door, slipped on the wet mud
that had been tracked to the pavement, skidded into the arms of the
bartender. The bartender took him in.

I managed to be well in the lead of the crowd of gawkers that pushed
in.

                 *       *       *       *       *

The girl with the black eyes was on the floor. There was a little
pearl-handled gun near her right hand. And there was a red streak,
along her forehead. The eyes were turned way up into her head, and were
fluttering nervously.

She looked as though she’d been creased by a bullet, and then slammed
to the floor with a good punch. I made for the booth where Lucas and
Slade had been eating.

It was empty. There was a litter of dishes and some wine bottles, and a
couple of glasses still half filled with whisky. The two men had gone.

The Chinese began to filter back from shelter. They were furtive-eyed,
utterly dazed. They shook their heads with lots of “no savvy’s” until
an interpreter came up.

Then there was a lot of jabbering in Cantonese, and the interpreter
told the story. It was painfully simple. The Chinese waiter had been
approached by the girl, who asked him to take five dollars and let her
wait on the tables for half an hour. He had done so. There had been a
scream, a blow and a shot, and there was the girl. That was all he
knew. He hadn’t seen any one who had been eating. The girl was waiting
on them.

That’s the way with the Chinese. When they want to disguise the truth
they always hang together and get a yarn that’s got just enough of
truth in it to make a good foundation for whatever falsehoods they want
to add.

The Mexican police took charge, the girl was taken out on a stretcher
and things went on the same as ever.

I poked around the gambling halls trying to find a trace of the two
men. Nothing doing. I made inquiries about the girl. They’d taken her
across the line over into El Centro. She was seriously hurt with a
concussion and possible fracture. She was unconscious. The doctor’s
orders were against any visitors when she recovered consciousness.

The two men had disappeared as utterly as though they had been wiped
out.

The desert settled back to its whispers, to the monotony of cloudless
skies and sun-swept days. The last I heard of the girl she was
conscious, expected to recover, but not saying anything as to how it
all happened.

And there was another funny development. The night of the shooting a
Mexican had sold a team of horses and a light cart to two men. They had
driven off. Three days later the team had been discovered northeast of
Holtville. The horses had been running. There was blood on the
dashboard.

Apparently the horses had been wandering on their own for nearly two
days. They’d struck some alfalfa and were feeding when discovered. But
they were encrusted with dried sweat and had been traveling without
water.

Gold was reported in the Panamints; a new strike, placer. I always
liked placer. It’s a one-man proposition, no great outlay for mill and
refinery, no blocking out of ore and looking for capital, no delving
underground. And again, I always liked new strikes.

So I flung on the packs, saddled the riding burro and started the trek
north. Sometimes I thought of the girl and the two men, and sometimes
at night the desert would whisper strange sounds, sentences that seemed
to indicate I was to have more of them, was to write a closing chapter
to the incident. But I could never make anything more out of it than
whispers.

If I was awake enough to listen, I was too awake to understand. If I
could make sense out of the sand whispers, it was because my
consciousness was dulled with sleep, and I wouldn’t wake up until
morning, trying to remember the sand whispers like I would a dream.

The placer proved to be a bunch of hooey, put across by some
get-rich-quick mining company that was unloading stock in Los Angeles;
but I had to cover half of the Panamints and a shoulder of the Funeral
Range before I discovered it was a plant. By that time I was thinking
of the border again, and I turned the burros back there.

                 *       *       *       *       *

On the map, if it’s large scale enough, you’ll find a little place
that’s listed as Andrade. It’s on the Colorado, just west of Yuma,
where the California boundary takes a jog down the river. And that
twenty-odd mile jog of boundary takes in some of the toughest border
country in the States, bar none.

It’s a saying in the customs at Tijuana that the farther east you go
the tougher it gets. They have reference to Mexicali. Go to Mexicali
and you’ll hear the same thing. The farther east, the tougher the
border. They have reference to this jog in the boundary.

Anyway, the place is listed on the map as Andrade. Go there and you’ll
find it’s Cantu on one side of the line, and Los Algodones on the
other. You won’t find anything that looks like Andrade.

And there’s lots of action at Los Algodones. They say there’s never
been a border crew there for six months that didn’t have white hair.
The theory is that six months on that post will give any of ’em white
hair.

Anyhow, I went to Los Algodones, across the drifting sand hills that
never stay put, but march like great white ghosts across the face of
the desert. My burros were staked and watered, and I had an evening on
my hands. I tried roulette and won, and got tired of it.

The evening begins at Los Algodones at around three o’clock in the
afternoon. It’s over by six. Ask any of the wise ones why they don’t
keep that section of the border open until nine o’clock, the way they
do at Tijuana and Mexicali, and see what he says. If he’s a wise one
he’ll say it with a smile. If he uses words, it’s an odds-on shot he
won’t be one of the wise ones--or else he’ll be figuring on leaving the
border.

I went into the Log Cabin and rubbered around for a while, and then I
went to one of the places where the girls hustle drinks for a
commission. It’s all done right out in front. A square of dance floor,
a greasy-skinned orchestra, a long bar, girls who can flick eyes over a
face and classify the character at a glance, and the tourists, suckers,
hangers-on and rubbernecks. The girls could play the game straight--or
not. Mostly, at Los Algodones there aren’t many tourists.

                 *       *       *       *       *

There I saw her. The same black eyes, just like two moist ripe olives,
the same full lips, the same swing to her walk, the same independent
poise of her head.

A blowzy kid with staring eyes gave me a level glance of appraisal,
then turned away. A cute trick came mincing up to me, talked a few
words of baby talk and made a half-hearted attempt to smile winsomely.
Then she went away.

The black-eyed kid came over. “Hello, pard.”

“Hello.”

“Looking around?”

“Looking around.”

“Listen, big boy, I’m on the up and up. I’m hustling drinks. If you
want to dance give me a chance. I can use the ticket. If you want to
drink and want somebody to can the mush and drink alongside of you, I
need the coin. If you’re just rubbering don’t waste my time and I won’t
waste yours. You look like a guy that knows the ropes and knows what he
wants. I’m the kid that hands it to ’em straight.”

I nodded. “We’ll sit at a booth and have a couple of drinks and a
talk.”

She jerked her head toward the bartender and walked to a table.

“Here’s mud in your eye,” she said.

I looked her over. “Last time I saw you was when you were being taken
to a hospital.”

She straightened a bit.

“Yes?”

“Yes. How did you happen to get into this racket?”

She smiled cheerfully. “None of your damned business!” she answered.

I nodded and drank my beer. She watched me with speculative eyes. “You
Bob Zane?”

“Yes; why?”

“Oh, nothing.”

“Wondering about the night you lay back of a sand hill and watched a
man talking to me?”

“Say, you’re a wise guy, ain’t you?”

“You might be surprised.”

“Not me! ’Nother drink?”

“One more.”

She waved a hand toward the bartender.

He started toward the booth, and the outer door opened. A sloppy man
with hard eyes set in a flabby face pushed his stomach through the
entrance.

“That’s my call,” said the girl. “Sorry, Bob Zane, but you’re ditched.
I wanted to talk to you, but I’ve got a date.”

And she did what blamed few dance hall girls do to a guy who is
spending--she got up and left me, cold. The bartender grinned and
walked away. I turned my head so I could get a better look at the man
who had entered.

Right away I saw that she had been lying. She didn’t have any date with
him. As far as I could see, he’d never set eyes on her before.

But she was out to make him. She tried all the wiles of the dance hall
girl. And, in the end, he motioned to the cute trick with the winsome
smile and the mincing walk.

The kid with the olive eyes got a chance and whispered to the cute
trick. The cutie let her eyes widen, nodded her head. After a little
while she pleaded some excuse, shunted the fat one to the girl with the
olive eyes, and beat it.

The paunchy man and the girl who had been drinking with me talked and
drank. Mostly they talked. At first it was the regular line of
conversation. Then it got lower and more confidential. When I left the
place the fat man was pulling himself across the slimy surface of the
moist table by his elbows, so that his voice would carry to the girl
without his having to speak loud.

What they were talking about I couldn’t tell, but they didn’t have eyes
or ears for anything or any one else.

                 *       *       *       *       *

I filed that fact away, went over to the Casino, where I tried a system
at roulette. The system didn’t work, but it came near enough to it so
my original five dollars lasted me pretty well through the afternoon.

The border was about to close when I got back to the dance hall. It’s a
period of frantic haste. Perspiring bartenders fling drinks at the
crowd that’s determined to get in its last lick. Couples stop dancing,
hurry to the bar and start scurrying for the border a good ten minutes
too early--afraid of getting left.

I looked around for the girl with the olive eyes and the fat man, and
didn’t get a trace of either. Then a subtle whisper rippled the crowd;
glasses clanged to the bar, and the exodus commenced. Ten seconds, and
the bar was deserted. Another ten seconds and the doors were closed,
locked, and the street became a parade toward the border.

Tired-eyed inspectors surveyed the seething mass with skilled eye.
Occasionally their hands darted out, and some man or woman stepped
aside. They weeded the sheep from the goats with a flicker of steely
glance that penetrated the mask of indifference the smuggler tries to
wear. It’s possible to smuggle a bottle across the border--but the
percentages are against it.

I got to my burro, said good night to the inspectors, and swung toward
my camp. It was dark when I got there. I started the fire, spoke to the
animals, went to the packs to get out a fresh can of coffee; and heard
a scream.

It was a thin scream, sounding as though I’d heard it before. It was
the scream of a woman locked in a struggle with some adversary, losing
her strength, but fighting with sheer nerve.

I kicked out the fire. No use to be outlined against flame, a perfect
target. Then I went toward that scream, on the run.

I saw them when I was within forty or fifty yards; the bulk of two
figures against the grayish white of the sand, the slender form of the
girl swaying and swinging, the bulky figure of the man.

As I came up, he got his hands to her throat.

Then I saw it was no mere struggle between man and woman, but that he
was trying to murder her. He heard my steps, and his hand relaxed from
her throat as he stiffened. His hand streaked for a gun, but I was on
him before his fingers touched metal.

He was like a huge bear. The strength of his arms was enormous, but he
was a flabby bear. Soft living had made the tremendous muscles soft.
And the desert does one thing for a man. It whipcords his strength into
tireless endurance.

When those hands grasped me I knew his strength was too great for an
immediate victory. But I pried loose, sank a punch into the heavy
stomach and began a dancing chase, flicking blows home when I had the
opportunity. Then when he was panting and puffing, I walked in, let him
grasp me, and showed him that bulk never makes for a long struggle.

I was reaching for his throat, not that I actually intended to throttle
him, but just to give him a taste of what he had given the girl, when
he went limp in my arms. The great weight jerked me forward, broke my
grip and sent me stumbling over it. The flabby man rolled to all fours,
got to his feet and ran into the darkness.

I turned to the limp bundle of femininity.

An automobile roared into speed. Lights sent twin shafts gleaming into
the darkness, then swung in a half arc; a red taillight winked
mockingly, then was swallowed in dust, and the sound of the motor
became fainter.

                 *       *       *       *       *

The girl stirred in my arms, “Get him!” she said. It was the girl of
the olive eyes.

I took her back to the camp fire. She sipped the tea I gave her, her
face bitter, her lips clamped together.

“You’ll have to ride a burro to get where you want to go,” I said.

She shook her head. “I don’t want to go anywhere.”

I said nothing. The desert stretched about us, a great waste of tumbled
rock hills, sage and sand. Off to the east the river lapped at the dry
soil.

“I hate it!” she spat, and as she spoke the golden rim of a moon, just
past the full, swung over the red mountain rim. “God, how I hate the
desert! Of all the grim, remorseless, unjust places on earth, the
desert is it.”

Never have I heard a woman speak with such hatred.

“The desert,” I told her, “is misunderstood. You must know its ways,
which are as the ways of a woman. When you know it, it is a wise
mother. It does justice after a fashion of its own, but it is always
justice.”

I put some more sage on the fire. It flamed up into a warm circle of
ruddy light.

“Bah!” she flung at me.

I said nothing. A desert wind came up with the moon, and the sand began
its interminable whispers.

“How I hate it all! I hate the dry heat, the glittering sand! I hate
the wind that makes everything whisper. Those whispers! They always
seem to be promising something, and they lie! Sand lies, that’s what
they are.”

“No,” I said gently; “the whispers don’t lie. Perhaps your ears lie.”

And then she began to talk, the words pouring from her mouth so fast
they trod on each other’s heels.

“Listen. There were two men. Either of them could have given me the
information that I wanted more than life itself. Either could have
saved my husband from a living hell. Those two men disappeared into the
desert in an old buggy. I was unconscious. By the time I came around
enough to insist upon trackers following them, the damned desert had
drifted sand and silt into the tracks until they couldn’t be followed.

“Then I heard that you could follow a track, sometimes when it was
months old, and I tried to get you. You had gone, slipped through my
fingers. I saw you again this afternoon, and was going to tell you my
story when the one man for whom I have been waiting came in. I tried to
get the information I wanted from him. He spotted me, somehow. I came
to your camp to wait for you. The border men told me where it was. He
followed me. You know the rest.

“That’s the justice of the desert you prate so much about! My husband
was intrusted with a big shipment of gold. We had only been married
three months. Three men took it from him, but under such circumstances
that he was held responsible. Those three men came to the border and
buried the gold. One sneaked out and changed the hiding place and
rushed to Mexicali. The others followed him, found him, demanded an
accounting. They went to the hiding place, but I couldn’t follow
because they had spotted me--I was unconscious, knocked down with a
blow, nearly killed with a bullet.

“Those men disappeared. Then the third started to follow the cold
trail. He traced them to Mexicali. Then he traced them in this
direction. He has some information I haven’t got. And he didn’t want me
to see you.

“Now they have all slipped through my hands. I’ll never be able to
establish John’s innocence. I’ve given everything, thrown all I had
into the gamble, trying to save my husband from prison. He got a jolt
of fifteen years! Think of it! Fifteen years!”

I looked at her eyes, rimmed with moisture, blazing with hatred. My
mind went back to that night in Mexicali when the team had gone out
into the night at a gallop, carrying the two men.

“It had been raining,” I muttered.

“What? When?”

“The night they took the buggy and went into the desert.”

“Yes!” she snapped. “It had been raining, but it cleared up and the
wind came up, and the ground dried almost immediately, and drifted over
the tracks. A week later the best tracker in the border country
couldn’t follow the tracks.”

I looked at the moon, then I thought for a moment, not daring to raise
her hopes too high.

“We’ll go to Yuma. We can get a car there. It’ll be an hour’s ride on
the burro,” I said.

“Why should I go to Yuma?”

“Because the desert is getting ready to show you its justice,” I told
her.

                 *       *       *       *       *

She rode to Yuma with me. The trip was mostly in silence. At Yuma I got
a man to drive us to the place where the team had been found, northeast
of Holtville. I knew a man that had a ranch near there. I got saddle
stock from him. By midnight we were out on horseback, the moon blazing
down with a light that turned midnight to day.

I searched for two hours before I found what I wanted. It was in a
silty patch where the wind had stretched its legs and swept the ground
down to bare crust.

There were two long lines of earth stretching out into the moonlight,
some four or five inches high. In between these lines of raised earth
were little mushrooms of baked dirt, flat on top, sticking up like
flattened door knobs thrust into the ground.

“What are they?” she asked.

I stopped my horse. “You’ve seen ’dobe houses, made of brick that’s
nothing but sun-dried mud pressed into shape?”

“Yes.”

“You know how well they endure?”

“Yes. They’re pretty substantial. Why?”

“Two or three months ago it rained in the desert. Two men started out
with a buggy because an automobile couldn’t travel over the slippery
ground. The wheels of the buggy, the feet of the horses, sank down into
the silty mud, pushed it into ruts.”

“Well?”

“Then the sun came out. The ground dried almost instantly and the sand
and silt started to drift, and covered up the tracks so they couldn’t
be followed.”

Her voice was impatient as she spat another question at me.

“Well, what’s the answer?”

“But the pressure of the wheels and the feet of the horses pushed the
silt into a hard mud. The sun baked it into ’dobe. Then the winds blew
for several weeks, and in places all the light stuff was blown away.
The tracks that had become invisible became visible again, not as ruts
sunk into the ground, but as ridges, high above the loose stuff that
had blown away.”

I could see her eyes glitter with black interest under the silvery
moonlight.

“These are the tracks of the buggy?”

“These are the tracks of a buggy driven about that time, when the
ground was wet, and with two horses.”

She sighed, a peculiar, tremulous sigh.

“Let’s go,” she said.

We rode on, following the tracks as best we could. We could only pick
them up in the silty spots where the wind had blown. But the buggy was
going straight when those tracks were made, evidently piloted toward
some star or natural landmark which had showed in the moonlight.

                 *       *       *       *       *

It was nearly daylight when we came to the place where the buggy had
stopped. Here were crisscross ridges of earth, miscellaneous mushrooms
of ’dobe.

“The rig stopped here for a long time,” I told her. “Then, when it went
away it took an aimless course as though there was no driver.”

She nodded.

I poked around in a sand drift. A bit of bone caught my eye. I scooped
away the sand. The body, what was left of it, was that of Sam Slade.
The girl wasted no time in exclamations or hysterics. She joined me in
getting the sand away, and in making another search. We found Pete
Lucas just as the sun went up.

There was a paper in the sand near where Slade’s hand had been. It was
scrawled, blotched with red stains, but it told the story:

    Lucas, Carl Flint and me held up John Lorne of a big gold
    shipment. I sneaked the gold from the other two and buried
    it here. Peter Lucas found me. I offered to split fifty fifty.
    He agreed. Lorne’s wife had us spotted and made a gun play.
    We beat it out here in a rig. Lucas found where the gold was
    and ambushed me, but I managed to get him even after he shot
    me in the back. I tried to get into the rig, but the horses
    got frightened and ran away. The desert is killing me. God,
    it’s hot! Lorne is innocent. The gold is....

The scrawl became unintelligible.

I looked from the note to the sand hills, red in the rays of the newly
risen sun. It took me a few minutes to spot the handle of a shovel. I
dug it out of the drifting sand. After that it was easy. The gold was
there. I had it uncovered and before her within half an hour.

Tears streamed down her face. The sun had turned from a red ball to a
white-hot disk. The heat rays were shimmering over the desert.

“I’m sorry, I----”

There came the sound of something ripping through the air, the plunk of
a high-power bullet striking a sand bank. Powdery sand scattered over
us both. The bullet had gone directly between us, a space of inches. A
second later there came the sound of a thin, spiteful crack. The sort
of noise smokeless powder makes in the heat of the desert. I flung her
down against the sand. Another bullet zipped past my arm. A third threw
sand in my face. I dug a trench, after a fashion, and got out my old
shiny forty-five from its shoulder holster. Not much good against a
rifle.

He came on then, charging, the windshield of his automobile down, his
rifle clattering a volley. Breastworks or trenches were no good now. He
was going forty miles an hour toward our flank. I ran to one side so
he’d concentrate his fire on me, and give the girl a chance. My old
forty-five bellowed an answer.

The automobile gave him the advantage of quick motion. But it’s hard to
shoot from a moving car, harder to shoot a rifle than a revolver. And
the old forty-five has accounted for many a rabbit on the run.

I saw dust flick from the shoulder of his coat, saw the hand drop, the
arm straighten. The gun slid down, hit the windshield support. He
grabbed for it with his other hand, and the wheels went into a skid.
The rifle struck the ground and went end over end. He slammed on the
brakes, but I was running forward.

He took in the situation with a swift glance, and did the only thing
available. He stepped on the throttle. I fired twice to stop him,
trying to find a rear tire, but he rounded a sand hill and got away.

                 *       *       *       *       *

The girl came to me. We picked up the rifle.

“He must have either followed us, or else had some tip we didn’t know
anything about.”

She nodded. “But we have the gold, and Slade’s confession!” Her voice
showed how she felt.

I rigged a pack on my saddle and walked, leading the horse, carrying
the rifle. The girl rode the other horse. The olive eyes gleamed with a
deep light.

“To think that those marks would come to light after weeks!”

I couldn’t resist the opportunity for a crack.

“Desert justice,” I said.

And she nodded, looked out at the shimmering waste of sand, out where
the horizons danced in the heat, and the mirages chased each other in a
game of ripple-tag.

We got to Holtville, made a report, and organized a posse to track down
Carl Flint, the flabby man with the cold eyes. It was two days before
they found him. One of my bullets had punctured his gasoline tank. He’d
abandoned the automobile and tried to make it for Yuma. His way lay
across drifting sand hills. He hadn’t made it.

The girl was to leave that night, to join her husband. The Governor had
issued a pardon. The gold had been restored to its owners. There was a
matter of a reward, almost five thousand dollars.

“It’s yours, Bob Zane.”

I shook my head. “You stayed with it, did the work. It’s yours.”

“No. We’ll split it.”

I shook my head again. “The desert keeps me supplied. You and your
husband will need it.”

We sat around my camp fire. Fifteen minutes and she would go toward
town to take her train. The reward was all that remained, and I
wouldn’t change my attitude on that.

The wind came up and the sand rustled softly against the sage. She
listened to it.

“The desert!” she breathed, and her voice was soft with emotion.

I thought of the three men who had robbed and cheated, and gone to the
desert, of the girl who had followed, of the desert justice of the
tracks that stuck in the air, the three bodies buried in the sand
hills. It was the drifting sand, the whispering sand, the shifting
desert that had lured them to their doom, betrayed them at the last,
covered their bodies.

It was a pleasant reverie. Was the sand telling the sage about it? Had
it whispered its judgment in the ears of the dying men before they had
succumbed to the sentence of doom which had been pronounced?

And then, abruptly, two arms were around my neck. My startled lips felt
the clinging caress of warm, moist lips.

There was moisture on my cheek where a tear-stained cheek pressed
against it--and she was gone.

I listened to her feet as they crunched into the soft sand as she
walked away, toward civilization, toward the train that would take her
to her waiting husband--and I knew then that John Lorne was a lucky
man.

The sound of the steps died away. The wind freshened, and the desert
whispered soothingly to my tired ears, little sand whispers that didn’t
make sense, but vaguely stirred and soothed. And then the swirling
sand, eddying against a dead sage, seemed to hiss the words “Desert
jussssstice,” and I nodded affirmation.

The desert is a wise mother when you know her ways.


[Transcriber’s note: This story appeared in the October 25, 1930 issue
of _Argosy_ magazine.]